Hello. Kwe.
My name is Marlene Lamarche.
I am an Algonquin from Kitigan Zibi Anishinaabeg.
I currently work at Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada
in the Treaties and Aboriginal Governments Business Management Unit.
I was the first Indigenous woman hired in the public service.
In 1990, I applied for a position in the government and to my surprise at the time there were no other Indigenous women working for the government.
I had an awkward interview.
I was made to sit in a darkened room at a large boardroom table with a panel of 12 individuals
who proceeded to ask me all kinds of questions from personal to professional.
I was told that it was the usual way interviews were conducted, but that I was the last to be interviewed
that way as they were changing the way government interviews would be conducted in the future.
I learned later on that that was a lie.
I was singled out because I was a native woman.
I told myself that I had to be strong for my people, as I was a kind of an ambassador for my people.
So I stood my ground and kept my head up and placed my hands under my knees
so that I would not fidget or make overly wide gestures.
I knew that any untoward movement on my part would be used to judge me
and all Indigenous people wanting to work in the government in the future.
And I succeeded. I got the job. Yay me!
For the remainder of my position at that first place,
I made sure to conduct myself to the utmost level of professionalism,
always being on time, always dressing for success, and never gossiping about anyone.
Accepting any and all work asked and offering to help others when my workload allowed it.
I told myself that at any time, if I didn't conduct myself that way,
it would be an excuse for them to let me go to continue
to not hire Indigenous people in the government.
I felt a heavy weight on my shoulders in those days.
It was not until I started with the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples
that I felt more accepted as I was no longer the only Indigenous employee working for the government then.
I was part of the Sixties Scoop.
I was sent to live in foster home when I was three years old and lived at nine different foster homes before I turned 18.
As the Bill C-31 came into force that year, I personally went to my band office and applied for my status card.
I told my band office members my story and they welcomed me with open arms and gave me a new sense of belonging that I had never had before.
I then started to attend Powwows and visited my relatives on the reservation to absorb as much culture and information as I could.
I kept going to visit my cousins, aunts and uncles and my grandmother when she was still alive.
She taught me about our clan, which is the Bear clan and what it meant.
It gave me a foundation as a member of the band that I had been missing.
I was placed with white families who didn't care about me and made me feel like my life didn't matter.
I decided that there was a purpose for my life after attempting to commit suicide 3 times at a very young age.
Since fate kept making me fail in death, I came to believe that there was a purpose to my life and that I would look for what that purpose was.
I believe that Indigenous people may very well be the salvation of this country.
It is important for as many of us to join the government as possible in order for us to influence the direction of the country.
I now see some of the ways Indigenous people have changed the ways Canadian view us.
And let me tell you, it's getting better and better every year.
I used to be afraid to walk into a coffee shop in downtown Ottawa in the eighties.
They would look at me like I was some kind of monster when I was just a small girl, for goodness sakes, what was I going to do to them?
Native people see themselves as steward of the land.
We are not now, nor have we ever attempted to take all of the resources of the land.
The land must be protected so that our progeny can live.
It is my hope that Indigenous people will live in a world where they are no longer seen as third class citizen
and can have clean drinking water and warm homes to live in
and where they can hunt and fish for subsistence without the fear of running out of fish and wildlife.
It's been an exhausting 25 plus years that I've been in the government and I'm looking forward to retirement.
I've had my share of discrimination and prejudice over the years.
I have mixed feelings about leaving, but I hope that Indigenous public servant will have it easier because of my contribution and dedication.
I tried my very best to teach non-native public servant about my people in order to demystify all the misunderstanding about our culture.
So carry on my people.
But carry a big stick.
Miigwetch.